## Zvi Grumet: Genesis, From Creation to Covenant

The author tries a little bit too hard to offer his own original interpretation of everything.

His overarching idea is that Genesis is about (to quote the blurb) God's "quest for a meaningful relationship with humankind". In creating man, God restricts himself, limiting his own omnipotence and omniscience in order to give man the freedom to develop on his own. Eden is a sort of laboratory in which God puts man into a controlled environment so he can observe his actions and behaviour. Not sure I can appreciate that; I think Grumet's God is too small.

Next, the eating of the forbidden fruit was not the fall from grace, indeed God _wanted_ man to eat the fruit and come to a knowledge of good and evil. His injunction not to eat the fruit was a kind of reverse psychology, and when that didn't work he had to bring in the snake in order to finally get man to go against his command. Grumet valiantly tries to push through this strange line of interpretation, but I find it quite unconvincing, and there's the occasional slip-up that, I think, shows that he doesn't entirely buy it himself, e.g., on pg. 61 where we are suddenly told that "the entrance to the Garden is blocked as a result of sin"... wait, what sin? Wasn't eating the fruit part of God's plan all along?

If the commandment not to eat from the tree of knowledge was reverse psychology, one does wonder what that means for the other commandments of the Torah. Were the Israelites actually supposed to worship other gods, commit adultery, and so on? Perhaps the Naughty Bible had it right all along?

There is a common trope among contemporary Jewish exegetes who emphasise the fallibility and humanity of the patriarchs and the other greats of the Old Testament, sometimes contrasting this with the perfection ascribed to Jesus by Christians. Without going into why this comparison is wide of the mark, it is curious to see that in practice they nevertheless still tend to dig in their heels to defend even the most dubious of actions as long as they are done by the right people, while vilifying their opponents to an almost comical degree. Grumet's description of Hagar as she is sent away with Ishmael is a case in point: most of us would probably feel sympathy for the desparate plight of a woman abandoned in the wilderness with her son with barely more than the clothes on her back, but not Grumet. Hagar, we read, is a "callous mother" who "tosses" her son under a bush (never mind that a few pages later we read that Ishmael must be at least 17 and hence hardly amenable to being tossed), and her moving away in order not to have to witness her child's death is likened to a soldier using a remote-controlled drone to kill an enemy without having to experience their death up close. There is callousness in there somewhere indeed, but I don't think it's on Hagar's part.

On top of that, the book is badly edited, with the author apparently taking "obtuse" to be a synonym for "obscure", and there's the occasional rather bewildering lack of common sense, for example when he rhetorically asks what the point of Abel's being a shepherd would be in a time when humans were not yet allowed to eat meat. (Surely they were allowed to drink milk and use the wool for clothing?)