# Notes on Soloveitchik's "The Lonely Man of Faith"

This is a brilliant example of how one can derive meaning and value from facing ostensibly contradictory passages in Scripture head on instead of retreating to a safe distance and subjecting the text to a meta-level analysis. A textual critic might take the first two chapters of Genesis and present to us a theory of how it arose from two independent traditions somewhat crudely spliced together, and then proceed to point out similarities with other contemporary Middle Eastern creation myths. A fine academic undertaking, but ultimately somewhat sterile. Soloveitchik, on the other hand, takes the text and spins it into a 100-page meditation on the "two Adams", the Majestic Adam of Genesis 1 and the Covenantal Adam of Genesis 2, elaborating on these two fundamental archetypes in considerable detail and drawing on a wide range of materials from the Talmud to Neoplatonist philosophy and on to Kant and Kierkegaard, covering topics from prayer to prophecy and from man's relationship to nature to the social contract.

Overall, I appreciate the broad perspective of the text and the effort the author clearly makes of staying confessionally neutral and making at least the broad sweep of his argument ownable to believers of all stripes. A little nugget I particularly enjoyed was his observation that Job's prayers and sacrifices at the beginning of his story were not acceptable to God because he offered them for his own household, while at the end of the story he prays for his friends and is accepted.

And yet, I find the essay as a whole unimpressive. Perhaps it's the eclectically woolly style, but I just wasn't able to get a firm mental grasp on the supposedly sharp distinction between the two Adams he is drawing, and repeatedly found myself failing to anticipate the next turn of his argument. In the end the whole exercise seems somewhat futile anyway, since we are told that really the two Adams aren't so antithetical after all and we're all a bit of both (or so I understood it). I just can't see any depth to the argument, though I'll be the first to admit that the lack of depth may be on my part and not on Soloveitchik's.

In terms of style, the author is to my mind overly fond of obscure words ("apothegm", "passional", "axiological") and Latin phrases that seem a bit pointless. What really turned me against the book, though, are the many small inaccuracies and misrepresentations throughout. I love the fact that he discusses the translations of the Hebrew term כבוד in the Septuagint and the Vulgate, and seriously engages with those translations rather than dismiss them with the uninformed sneer so sadly common among Orthodox Jewish commentators. But while my Greek is not sophisticated enough to evaluate his claim that translating כבוד as δόξη gives it an "intellectualistic coloring", a simple look at the dictionary confirms that the word is δόξα with an α, not an η. Similarly, the counterpart to ἀρχή is not ἔσχατος (masculine) but ἔσχατον (neuter). Small details, of course, but they do make me wonder about all his other claims that are even further outside my area of expertise.

To me, the most egregious example comes at the very end with his misrepresentation of Tertullian's supposed quote (err, "apothegm") _credo quia absurdum est_ as an expression of fideism. It is well known that Tertullian (a) didn't say this, and (b) what he did say (in _De Carne Christi_) is not about the question of faith vs intellect at all but aimed at refuting Marcionism. While a detailed discussion of this would, of course, be out of scope for the essay, I don't think it's too much to expect of the author to look up the original quote and read it in context.

At the end of the day, like so many grand unifying theories of the human nature Soloveitchik's vision is too heavily laced with lazy stereotypes and second-hand truisms to be digestible to me.