learning-from-our-elder-brothers.md, before:

# Learning from our Elder Brothers

A collection of notes on the Tanakh gleaned from Jewish podcasts, specifically Alex Israel's [Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/show/4Qu9OF1UY1Zia0zBMoCw7v?si=b87a56d76cf442fc) and Jonathan Livi's [Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/show/45srXeZZgZKHAomOmpIkmh?si=0405a8b93eb24591).

## Exodus

### Parashah Terumah (Exodus 25:1-27:19)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1UpDsdabywQyc11onGMUi1?si=7af05dd606134aef): The instructions to build the altar and the table are given in the singular, whereas the instruction to build the ark is in the plural.[^1] In Midrashic interpretation, the altar is associated with the High Priest and the table with the king, of which there is only one each; the ark, on the other hand, is associated with the Torah, which is for everyone.

[^1]: So also in the Vulgate, but interestingly not in the Septuagint, which has the singular in all three cases.

### Parashah Ki Tisa (Exodus 30:11-34:35)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2VjuzVqGKOmgzuUzewYd9l?si=w1SOst7TQKOIW1zua0jg9g): "As for the man Moses" (Exodus 32:1) may be a realisation on part of the people of Israel that Moses is not a God after all. Steeped in Egyptian culture, they may have assumed that Moses was a God like Pharaoh, and the realisation that he was not sent them looking for a replacement.

"Your people whom you brought out of Egypt have become corrupt" (Exodus 32:7) harks back to the story of the Flood, where "all the people on the earth had corrupted their ways" (Genesis 6:12). In both cases God decides to destroy the people and start over with Moses/Noah, but unlike Noah, who just accepted God's decision and the destruction it entailed, Moses argues with God and convinces him to change his mind.

The thirteen attributes of God (Exodus 34:6-7): note that all of them are spiritual attributes, not physical ones (as perhaps a pagan deity might have), and they focus on God's interaction with humans, not his power over the natural world.

When God says he will punish the children of the wicked to the third and fourth generation, he is not saying that he will punish the children for the sins of the parents, but that the consequences of the parents' sins will be felt for generations. Thus, this is no contradiction to Ezekiel 18:20, which says that the son will not bear the punishment for the father's sin.

### Parashah Vayakhel (Exodus 35:1-38:20)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1TZiaLjHEznDT4ZzLgN20O?si=fFJmsb3JQFGSKiZHswR0Uw): The (repeated) command to keep the Sabbath says to refrain from work ("melakha"), but does not define what work is. However, that same word is used in the description of the building of the tabernacle, so the rabbis have inferred that the work forbidden on the Sabbath is the same as the work done to build the tabernacle.

## Leviticus

### Parashah Tzav (Leviticus 6:1-8:36)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/4iM0oj0CGiviomsOfDfRZF?si=o7g0u_C2S4u67fcojAncSQ): Leviticus 8:23: "Moses slaughtered the ram and took some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron’s right ear, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot." The first word "vayishkhat"/"and he slaughetered" has a [shalshelet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shalshelet) on the last syllable. This is one of the rarest cantillation marks in the Torah. It expresses hesitation, and is used only four times in the entire Tanakh. It is used here because this is the last time Moses acts as the high priest before Aaron takes over.

## Deuteronomy

### Parashah Shoftim (Deuteronomy 16:18-21:9)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/5N5TwDqKyDas5jKp9Rck42?si=T02ea08uRF-RG2Oqg1KlGQ): Deuteronomy 20:10-18 describes the rules for war. It contains three stipulations:

1. Before attacking a city, a peace offer must be made. If the city accepts, it becomes a vassal state, and the people are spared.
2. If the city does not accept, it is to be besieged, and if it falls, all men are to be killed, but women and children may be spared.
3. This only applies to cities "at a distance"; "the cities of the nations the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance" are to be destroyed completely, leaving no one alive.

The question is what "this" in Rule 3 refers to: does it only apply to Rule 2, or to both Rule 1 and Rule 2?

In the latter case, there is no peace on offer for the Canaanites at all, they must be destroyed. This is the opinion of Rashi.

In the former case, the Canaanite cities first have to be offered peace. Only if they do not accept are they to be besieged and obliterated. This is the opinion of Ramban. He seeks to prove this from the fact that Moses offered peace to the kings of the Transjordan, though one might consider this to be a weak argument, since it's not clear that they belong to "the nations the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance". It also accords with the statement in Joshua 11:19 that "except for the Hivites living in Gibeon, not one city made a treaty of peace with the Israelites", which one could interpret to imply that peace would have been offered if they had asked for it. However, the story of the Gibeonites throws doubt on this interpretation, since before concluding a peace treaty with them the Israelites first ask them where they come from, and only accept after they have been tricked into believing that they come from a faraway land. If a peace offer had been on the cards anyway, it is not clear why they would have asked this.

The opinion of Rashi is what I have more generally heard in Christian interpretation. To a modern mind Ramban's interpretation is undeniably more palatable, but I wonder whether it is not just the easy way out.

## 2 Kings

### Chapter 2

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0QGxEug5Y4uuNqlTbXj3aJ?si=425b35b426444c00): When Elisha asks Elijah in v9 to "let me inherit a double portion of your spirit", he is asking to be treated as the firstborn. Elijah had many disciples (as this chapter shows) who, as his spiritual children, inherit his spirit, but Elisha gets a double portion of the inheritance.

### Chapter 19

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0KKL9E29oRa51ntcVl5Emy?si=db2139acc45a47aa): Sennacherib’s siege of Jerusalem is described on the Taylor Prism, where he says that he shut up Hezekiah in Jerusalem like a "caged bird". Now cf Isaiah 31:5: "Like birds hovering overhead, the Lord Almighty will shield Jerusalem; he will shield it and deliver it." (NIV) For more than 2000 years one would have read this as a bland, general association of birds with freedom, but thanks to modern archaeology we can now see that it was perhaps a pointed rebuttal of Assyrian propaganda.

## Isaiah

### Chapter 7

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/3vCN4T36fGN4bDzkDEbB3V?si=32db0f76a9224334): "That verse" is simply interpreted as an emphasis that the threat of a combined Aramean/Northern invasion will go away very soon: a woman will give birth to a child, and before that child is old enough to choose right over wrong, the enemies’ country will be devastated. It’s an elegant interpretation, but I feel like a bit too much is said about the child for it to just serve as a measure of time.

### Chapter 45

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/6pWu90kkz6QijLYzVB05d2?si=OGjjYFcBQHyMSl-XKOnTZA): In the [Cyrus Cylinder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_Cylinder), Cyrus describes his victory over the Babylonians, and his repatriation of exiled peoples (not, however, mentioning Israel explicitly). The king ascribes his victory to Marduk, which is often contrasted with the biblical picture of Cyrus as a tool of God, and indeed taken to refute it. But note verse 4: "I summon you by name and bestow on you a title of honor, _though you do not acknowledge me_." (NIV) The prophet is fully aware that Cyrus does not worship the God of Israel, but he is still God's instrument.

(One might quibble with Alex Israel's comments on the dualistic nature of the Babylonian religion made in the same podcast: I think he is mixing up the Babylonians with the Persians.)

### Chapter 57

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2t5xL9kSbU9f402CBY8CrY?si=Ke-OEYE2TnuCeD4mmpIA7w): Interesting Talmudic passage about the righteous vs the repentant sinner ([Berakhot 34b.22](https://www.sefaria.org/Berakhot.34b.22?lang=bi)), quoting the opinion of Rabbi Abbahu "who holds that penitents are superior to the righteous": "In the place where penitents stand, even the full-fledged righteous do not stand, as it is stated: 'Peace, peace upon him who is far and him who is near.' Peace and greeting is extended first to him who is far, the penitent, and only thereafter is peace extended to him who is near, the full-fledged righteous." As a Christian, one might be reminded of the parable of the lost sheep.

## Hosea

### Chapter 8

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/6oBBL9YRJmXrPDTCrnXPO8?si=UQyv5HrlSNOiRZSV_J-eAw): Verse 12: "I wrote for them the many things of my law, but they regarded them as something foreign." This is usually interpreted to mean that the Israelites did not keep the Torah, but there is a fascinating alternative interpretation in the Talmud ([Midrash Tankhuma, Ki Tisa 34](https://www.sefaria.org/Midrash_Tanchuma%2C_Ki_Tisa.34.1?lang=bi)): "when the Holy One, blessed be He, said to Moses 'Write thou' [_sc._ the Torah], Moses wanted to write the Mishnah as well. However, the Holy One, blessed be He, foresaw that ultimately the nations of the world would translate the Torah into the Greek language and would claim: 'We are the Israelites.' Now the scales are balanced (as to who are His people). The Holy One, blessed be He, can say to the nations of the world: 'You claim that you are My children, but I know that only those who know My secrets are My children. Where are His secrets (to be found)? In the Mishnah, which was given orally, and from which everything can be derived. (...) Why do you wish the Mishnah to be written? What would be the difference, then, between the peoples of the world and Israel?'"

Intriguing as this interpretation is, one might object that it wasn't "the nations of the world" who translated the Torah into Greek; after all, the Septuagint predates Christianity by a couple of centuries and was prepared by Jews.

Commit message:

A few words about the sources.

learning-from-our-elder-brothers.md, after:

# Learning from our Elder Brothers

A collection of notes on the Tanakh gleaned from Jewish podcasts.

## Sources

Links are given to Spotify, but the podcasts are also available on other platforms.

**Alex Israel's [Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/show/4Qu9OF1UY1Zia0zBMoCw7v?si=b87a56d76cf442fc)**: lecture style, one episode per chapter (10-15 minutes), starting from the Book of Joshua. Fairly accessible and high-level, with carefully chosen references to other parts of the Tanakh, the Talmud, the writings of the Jewish sages, and modern archaeological and historical insights.

**Jonathan Livi's [Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/show/45srXeZZgZKHAomOmpIkmh?si=0405a8b93eb24591)**: recordings of live classes on the weekly Torah portion and the corresponding Haftarot, with lots of attention paid to the details of the Hebrew text. The episodes are longer (20-30 minutes for weekday classes, 60-90 minutes on Sundays) and include a lot of audience interaction. Less academic in style than Alex Israel's podcast. Livi is unfortunately given to lengthy ill-informed diatribes on historical, cultural and political topics, but there are enough nuggets to make it worth bearing with the noise. I find his approach to Midrash particularly interesting: he neither dismisses it as useless legend nor takes it as literal truth, but rather seeks to interpret it as an indirect comment on the text pointing out connections and subtleties that might otherwise be missed.

Both podcasts are squarely aimed at a Jewish audience and make frequent use of Hebrew terms and concepts; the attached [Hebrew cheatsheet](hebrew-cheatsheet.md) may be helpful. Christian listeners should be prepared for occasional hurtful (and again not terribly well-informed) comments about our religion, but I find the insights are worth the occasional discomfort.

## Exodus

### Parashah Terumah (Exodus 25:1-27:19)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1UpDsdabywQyc11onGMUi1?si=7af05dd606134aef): The instructions to build the altar and the table are given in the singular, whereas the instruction to build the ark is in the plural.[^1] In Midrashic interpretation, the altar is associated with the High Priest and the table with the king, of which there is only one each; the ark, on the other hand, is associated with the Torah, which is for everyone.

[^1]: So also in the Vulgate, but interestingly not in the Septuagint, which has the singular in all three cases.

### Parashah Ki Tisa (Exodus 30:11-34:35)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2VjuzVqGKOmgzuUzewYd9l?si=w1SOst7TQKOIW1zua0jg9g): "As for the man Moses" (Exodus 32:1) may be a realisation on part of the people of Israel that Moses is not a God after all. Steeped in Egyptian culture, they may have assumed that Moses was a God like Pharaoh, and the realisation that he was not sent them looking for a replacement.

"Your people whom you brought out of Egypt have become corrupt" (Exodus 32:7) harks back to the story of the Flood, where "all the people on the earth had corrupted their ways" (Genesis 6:12). In both cases God decides to destroy the people and start over with Moses/Noah, but unlike Noah, who just accepted God's decision and the destruction it entailed, Moses argues with God and convinces him to change his mind.

The thirteen attributes of God (Exodus 34:6-7): note that all of them are spiritual attributes, not physical ones (as perhaps a pagan deity might have), and they focus on God's interaction with humans, not his power over the natural world.

When God says he will punish the children of the wicked to the third and fourth generation, he is not saying that he will punish the children for the sins of the parents, but that the consequences of the parents' sins will be felt for generations. Thus, this is no contradiction to Ezekiel 18:20, which says that the son will not bear the punishment for the father's sin.

### Parashah Vayakhel (Exodus 35:1-38:20)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1TZiaLjHEznDT4ZzLgN20O?si=fFJmsb3JQFGSKiZHswR0Uw): The (repeated) command to keep the Sabbath says to refrain from work ("melakha"), but does not define what work is. However, that same word is used in the description of the building of the tabernacle, so the rabbis have inferred that the work forbidden on the Sabbath is the same as the work done to build the tabernacle.

## Leviticus

### Parashah Tzav (Leviticus 6:1-8:36)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/4iM0oj0CGiviomsOfDfRZF?si=o7g0u_C2S4u67fcojAncSQ): Leviticus 8:23: "Moses slaughtered the ram and took some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron’s right ear, on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot." The first word "vayishkhat"/"and he slaughetered" has a [shalshelet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shalshelet) on the last syllable. This is one of the rarest cantillation marks in the Torah. It expresses hesitation, and is used only four times in the entire Tanakh. It is used here because this is the last time Moses acts as the high priest before Aaron takes over.

## Deuteronomy

### Parashah Shoftim (Deuteronomy 16:18-21:9)

[The Parashah Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/5N5TwDqKyDas5jKp9Rck42?si=T02ea08uRF-RG2Oqg1KlGQ): Deuteronomy 20:10-18 describes the rules for war. It contains three stipulations:

1. Before attacking a city, a peace offer must be made. If the city accepts, it becomes a vassal state, and the people are spared.
2. If the city does not accept, it is to be besieged, and if it falls, all men are to be killed, but women and children may be spared.
3. This only applies to cities "at a distance"; "the cities of the nations the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance" are to be destroyed completely, leaving no one alive.

The question is what "this" in Rule 3 refers to: does it only apply to Rule 2, or to both Rule 1 and Rule 2?

In the latter case, there is no peace on offer for the Canaanites at all, they must be destroyed. This is the opinion of Rashi.

In the former case, the Canaanite cities first have to be offered peace. Only if they do not accept are they to be besieged and obliterated. This is the opinion of Ramban. He seeks to prove this from the fact that Moses offered peace to the kings of the Transjordan, though one might consider this to be a weak argument, since it's not clear that they belong to "the nations the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance". It also accords with the statement in Joshua 11:19 that "except for the Hivites living in Gibeon, not one city made a treaty of peace with the Israelites", which one could interpret to imply that peace would have been offered if they had asked for it. However, the story of the Gibeonites throws doubt on this interpretation, since before concluding a peace treaty with them the Israelites first ask them where they come from, and only accept after they have been tricked into believing that they come from a faraway land. If a peace offer had been on the cards anyway, it is not clear why they would have asked this.

The opinion of Rashi is what I have more generally heard in Christian interpretation. To a modern mind Ramban's interpretation is undeniably more palatable, but I wonder whether it is not just the easy way out.

## 2 Kings

### Chapter 2

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0QGxEug5Y4uuNqlTbXj3aJ?si=425b35b426444c00): When Elisha asks Elijah in v9 to "let me inherit a double portion of your spirit", he is asking to be treated as the firstborn. Elijah had many disciples (as this chapter shows) who, as his spiritual children, inherit his spirit, but Elisha gets a double portion of the inheritance.

### Chapter 19

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0KKL9E29oRa51ntcVl5Emy?si=db2139acc45a47aa): Sennacherib’s siege of Jerusalem is described on the Taylor Prism, where he says that he shut up Hezekiah in Jerusalem like a "caged bird". Now cf Isaiah 31:5: "Like birds hovering overhead, the Lord Almighty will shield Jerusalem; he will shield it and deliver it." (NIV) For more than 2000 years one would have read this as a bland, general association of birds with freedom, but thanks to modern archaeology we can now see that it was perhaps a pointed rebuttal of Assyrian propaganda.

## Isaiah

### Chapter 7

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/3vCN4T36fGN4bDzkDEbB3V?si=32db0f76a9224334): "That verse" is simply interpreted as an emphasis that the threat of a combined Aramean/Northern invasion will go away very soon: a woman will give birth to a child, and before that child is old enough to choose right over wrong, the enemies’ country will be devastated. It’s an elegant interpretation, but I feel like a bit too much is said about the child for it to just serve as a measure of time.

### Chapter 45

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/6pWu90kkz6QijLYzVB05d2?si=OGjjYFcBQHyMSl-XKOnTZA): In the [Cyrus Cylinder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrus_Cylinder), Cyrus describes his victory over the Babylonians, and his repatriation of exiled peoples (not, however, mentioning Israel explicitly). The king ascribes his victory to Marduk, which is often contrasted with the biblical picture of Cyrus as a tool of God, and indeed taken to refute it. But note verse 4: "I summon you by name and bestow on you a title of honor, _though you do not acknowledge me_." (NIV) The prophet is fully aware that Cyrus does not worship the God of Israel, but he is still God's instrument.

(One might quibble with Alex Israel's comments on the dualistic nature of the Babylonian religion made in the same podcast: I think he is mixing up the Babylonians with the Persians.)

### Chapter 57

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2t5xL9kSbU9f402CBY8CrY?si=Ke-OEYE2TnuCeD4mmpIA7w): Interesting Talmudic passage about the righteous vs the repentant sinner ([Berakhot 34b.22](https://www.sefaria.org/Berakhot.34b.22?lang=bi)), quoting the opinion of Rabbi Abbahu "who holds that penitents are superior to the righteous": "In the place where penitents stand, even the full-fledged righteous do not stand, as it is stated: 'Peace, peace upon him who is far and him who is near.' Peace and greeting is extended first to him who is far, the penitent, and only thereafter is peace extended to him who is near, the full-fledged righteous." As a Christian, one might be reminded of the parable of the lost sheep.

## Hosea

### Chapter 8

[The Tanakh Podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/6oBBL9YRJmXrPDTCrnXPO8?si=UQyv5HrlSNOiRZSV_J-eAw): Verse 12: "I wrote for them the many things of my law, but they regarded them as something foreign." This is usually interpreted to mean that the Israelites did not keep the Torah, but there is a fascinating alternative interpretation in the Talmud ([Midrash Tankhuma, Ki Tisa 34](https://www.sefaria.org/Midrash_Tanchuma%2C_Ki_Tisa.34.1?lang=bi)): "when the Holy One, blessed be He, said to Moses 'Write thou' [_sc._ the Torah], Moses wanted to write the Mishnah as well. However, the Holy One, blessed be He, foresaw that ultimately the nations of the world would translate the Torah into the Greek language and would claim: 'We are the Israelites.' Now the scales are balanced (as to who are His people). The Holy One, blessed be He, can say to the nations of the world: 'You claim that you are My children, but I know that only those who know My secrets are My children. Where are His secrets (to be found)? In the Mishnah, which was given orally, and from which everything can be derived. (...) Why do you wish the Mishnah to be written? What would be the difference, then, between the peoples of the world and Israel?'"

Intriguing as this interpretation is, one might object that it wasn't "the nations of the world" who translated the Torah into Greek; after all, the Septuagint predates Christianity by a couple of centuries and was prepared by Jews.
